The person who's going to say the blessing
is Benny Shendo, who is the director of
our American Indian program here at
Stanford, and he's Hamas.
I'm going to say the opening prayer in my
own language. So also, as I say the
prayer, you can say your own prayer as
well.
I feel that the people who are here today,
they cannot go to the other side of the
world, and they cannot go to the other
side of the world, and they cannot go to
the other side of the world, and they
cannot go to the other side of the world,
and they cannot go to the other side of
the world, and they cannot
go to the other side of the world, .
OK. I guess we're going to go ahead and
get started. So everyone can be seated.
AND FIND
A SEAT.
Okay, just to, we want to welcome you to
Stanford University, everyone who's come
from other universities. My name is Rania
Ramirez. I'm a part of SNAG, which is
Stanford Native American Graduate Group,
and we helped put put this conference
together or this forum together. We just
want to say that this is supposed to be
like a conversation. The way it's going to
work is each person who is going to talk
about their work is going to come and sit
at this point in the table, mainly because
we are videotaping the event.
And we'll present for about 10 minutes.
and then the rest of the time will be for
basically a conversation just to talk
about you know the issues that were
brought up in the presentation maybe some
similar experiences we've had doing doing
research just you know very informal you
know we want people to feel comfortable
and just just really enjoy the day. We're
going to start out with Benny Shendo who's
going to come up and say a few words and
then after Benny Shendo will be Jim
Larimore who used to be the director of
our American Indian program office but is
now the acting dean of students here at
the university.
Again, I'd just like to welcome all of you
to the second annual research forum. As
Rania mentioned, I'm the Assistant Dean of
Students and also Director of our American
Indian program. I'm new to Stanford. I've
been here for going on my seventh month,
but it's been really good. When Gil
mentioned this forum last year, they had
their first annual, it really got me
excited because it was one of the things
that we really wanted to do is, you know,
what are some of our students doing in
terms of scholarship and work that affect
Native communities. So we talked about it
and we began to brainstorm it. We did it
last year, it was very informal, and it
was a wonderful experience. We wanted to
keep it that way. We wanted it to be a
conversation, a discussion, so that we
could really get a lot out of it. So we
planned it, and Renia has been very, both
Renia and Gail have been very instrumental
in making this happen again. So I'd just
like to welcome all of you on behalf of
our American Indian and Alaska Native
program at Stanford. So I hope you enjoy
your day. Jim?
I guess this is kind of an unusual thing
for me because, as Renia mentioned, I've
been kind of changing my professional
identities around Stanford for the last
year or so and have made a series of
shifts. And the shifts that have come have
been after serving for nine years as the
director for the American Indian program,
making a break and starting full-time as a
doctoral student over in the School of
Education in higher ed and administration
and policy analysis last fall. And after
six months of being a student, taking a
leave and stepping in as the acting dean
of students here, and after my first week
on the job, which was just this past week,
I can't tell you how much I'm looking
forward to going back to being a student
again in September and just getting much
more in touch with classroom life, with
research and with a chance to really focus
on thinking hard about things, on kind of
how things are, how they got that way, and
maybe how they could be. And so this is,
for me, a little bit of a homecoming in
being back involved with the community
after trying to maintain a little bit of
distance to help my own transition this
year. And so it's a real kind of honor and
a pleasure to be among all the folks that
are here this morning. I spoke yesterday
afternoon with Condoleezza Rice, our
university provost, and it was then that
she informed me that she had a scheduling
conflict that had come up with a gathering
up in San Francisco. And so Condi asked me
if I would extend a welcome on behalf of
the university to folks that have traveled
from other schools, other places here in
California and elsewhere to be with us
today. and and so I hope that it looks
from looking out behind the camera and out
the window that that this may be the kind
of Stanford weather and Northern
California weather that we're accustomed
to here and so I hope that the
surroundings will be pleasant and in
supportive of the kind of thinking and
talking that you all want to try and do
today as as Benny was it was doing his
opening prayer for this this gathering
this morning it reminded me of how how
important it is that as people gather that
we pray, and as we pray that we pray for
wisdom, among other things. And that the
wisdom that we seek is in order to make
life better for those around us, to make
life better for those among us, and also
to try and make life better for those yet
to come. And I think that, for me,
represents the spirit of what American
Indian and Alaska Native research is
about. We have been researchers and
scholars for thousands of years and it may
not have been things that have been
written down and recorded in the forms
that universities are used to. But I think
you can find no better example of
scholarship and humane scholarship than
the kind of knowledge that exists within
our communities, the kind of knowledge
that people are about working with and
creating and passing on. And so I want to
say, again, on behalf of myself and for
the university, that this is an important
gathering and that this marks, I think, a
real turning point for the way that we can
support each other and the way that we can
support students and support faculty,
tenured and otherwise, in the pursuits and
the kinds of pressures that they face in
their lives. As people go through the day,
what I would like to suggest or offer as a
way of thinking about this is that people
realize that this is a time, some of you
may have met each other, you may have come
with friends from other campuses, but this
is a real opportunity to get to know
people that you may come in contact with
on an infrequent basis, people that you
may not see until maybe during Powell
season, and you'll see folks around
different places, faces that you might
recognize in different parts of the
country at different meetings or community
gatherings. And so I hope that during the
day you'll take the opportunity to get to
know some folks that may not be from where
you're from and get a chance to help
establish a tighter community base for all
of us that way. I would also like to
suggest that maybe there are a few
different ways to think about how this
gathering is situated and what this
represents because I think it's important
to be able to look at this assembly of
people and to look back at how this
connects with our past. And to think about
how this connects you with previous
generations within your own tribe, within
your own communities, within the campus
communities that you're a part of, within
the whole idea of knowledge and what that
represents for our communities. And so as
you're here and as you're hopefully going
through some of the excitement about
thinking about things that people are
going to present, you'll be able to feel
some connection with those that have been
here before you. I also hope that you'll
feel a sense of that connection with the
people that are here with you today, and
that as you listen to people and engage in
some discussions with each other, that
you'll be able to do that in a friendly,
cooperative, but even challenging way with
each other, and to really help push each
other to the best and the hardest thinking
that you can do about things. And finally,
which kind of brings me back to my old
life, being, I think, more involved on a
regular basis with the community here, I
really hope that you'll carry some things
away from this weekend that are going to
help you within your own communities and
especially that are going to help you
reach out to one more person, one more
student, whether they're a very young kid,
whether they're in elementary school or
junior high or high school, or maybe a
college student on your own campus.
Because the ultimate measure of how
successful we are is going to be how much
we're able to do to bring more people
along with us. And so the knowledge, the
kind of energy that you pick up today, I
hope sustains you in your own activities,
but I hope also helps you in your work as
a community leader, as someone who has
influence, as someone whose actions and
thoughts and words carry a great deal of
power. And so with that, I just want to
say thanks to all of you for making the
trip here early on a Saturday morning when
I know that you've all been no doubt
working hard on other things and we're
getting up early this morning. It may not
have been kind of what your original
intention had been some time ago. We're
just glad to have you here. And one final
thing for, I guess I'll pass this along to
Raina, is as the day goes on, you may find
that you're in need of a break or
something a little bit different. And so
given that this is research, and I think
sometimes people have fairly defined,
rigid conceptions of research, I wanted to
bring along a piece of poetry that was
written by an Osage writer and poet named
Dwayne Big Eagle, who has a poem entitled
My Grandfather Was a Quantum Physicist
that some of you may be familiar with. And
so if there's a break and you need
something a little kind of interesting and
scholarly in a different way, I hope that
this might be a benefit to you as well.
Anyway, that's it. That's as long-winded
as I can get speaking for me and the
provost. Anyway, welcome. I'm glad that
you're all here. Thanks, Jim.
What we wanted to do also is if the
professors who brought students, if they
could introduce their students, you know,
their name and their field and all that
kind of thing. So we're going to go ahead
and get started.
So I'm going to let the professor from
James here do the introductions.
I just want to move up here a little.
Let me just stand up for a minute so I can
see everybody.
I'm very glad to be here again. This year,
I'm kind of reflecting, as we begin this
day, on what we did last year. And it
occurs to me that we've doubled in several
ways. We've doubled in terms of the number
of schools that are represented here. I
think last year, it was just Stanford and
UC Santa Cruz. and this year we've got
people from Mills College and UC Berkeley
is here too, is that right? So we're up to
four schools in this area. That's
exciting. We've doubled in the size of the
room. That's always encouraging. We
wouldn't have had enough room if we'd been
back in that old space. And I've noticed,
too, that we've doubled in the amount that
Gil Ramirez is eating so far.
I owed you one there.
I had heard a lot of good things over the
years about Jim Larimore, and it's been
really nice to get a chance to meet him
here this morning. And I feel like I've
learned some things already. Although I'd
heard what a wonderful person he was, I
didn't realize how wise and knowledgeable
he is because he said everything that I
wanted to say. So I know he must be wise
and knowledgeable. He said a lot of good
things for us to keep in mind, and I don't
have too much, nor should I really add to
what he said. I do think this is an
unusual event. I think that each one of us
can think back in our own lives in
whatever stage of the educational process
that we may be in, and I mean the kind of
restricted institutional formal kind of
education that most of us in this room are
involved in in one way or another. There's
other kinds of education, other kinds of
knowledge that maybe aren't as widely
recognized as such by a lot of people as
Jim has suggested. But certainly we can
all think about our experiences in the
educational institutions and realize that
an event like this is a pretty unusual
occurrence, or we can just come together
in what has appropriately been called a
research forum for American Indians,
without having to defend the legitimacy of
the kinds of concerns and questions and
topics that we are concerned with before
any kind of wider audience. So we can come
together and talk to each other. That
doesn't mean we all think alike. It
doesn't mean that we all are going to
approach any given issue in the same way.
But that we can really come into this room
and this space with a sense of community,
of mutual understanding and respect and
concern and have a meaningful
conversation. We can say some things, talk
about our own specific projects and also
have a chance to learn from each other.
Now I think one of the real ways in which
the educational system fails us is when it
creates a competitive environment that
says that your worth is dependent on your
GPA or the comments that the teacher
writes on your paper or how you compare
with other people. We know, I think, from
a variety of different kinds of
backgrounds that that kind of basis for
human worth is not real solid. It actually
contributes to a lot of the kinds of
problems that we see in our society and in
our own lives. So I would just kind of
call that to our attention this morning,
that we can kind of come to this with a
different frame of mind, with a different
understanding about what a human being is
and what the importance of human
creativity is. That doesn't mean that we
can't challenge each other, that we can't
push each other to think about issues in
ways that we haven't looked at. I know I
want to be challenged. I'm unfortunately
not going to be here for the whole day.
I'm going to Duluth, Minnesota, where I'm
going to participate in the Tribal
Colleges Consortium Annual Conference,
something I've been looking forward to
very well and for quite a long time and
I'm going to be giving a kind of a
workshop not really a I'm not going to
make a presentation so much as a workshop
on some things that I've been working on
in Santa Cruz and mainly not because I
think I have something to teach them but
because I want to hear what they have to
say to me from the tribal college context
you know what we do at UC Santa Cruz so I
think all of us can benefit from those
kinds of feedback and and critique but
that there's a way in which we can do that
that builds builds us up as a community
that builds us up as individuals rather
than as in a sense of that well I have to
show that I'm sharper than this person or
I've thought about this a little more than
they have or that there's any kind of a
competitive competitive atmosphere you
know we're all here for a reason this this
forum has been facilitated and organized
very very well by Iranian and and Gil
Ramirez, and we owe them a lot of thanks.
And I hope at the end of the day that
you'll, or throughout the day that you'll
have a chance to just express your
appreciation for their work on this. But
they've brought each of you here, you
know, for a reason. And so there's nobody
here that has to prove that they have a
right to be here or that they have
something to say. We're all kind of in
this together, if you will. So I'm just
gonna stop there there and maybe suggest a
little bit about process. One of the ways
we do have to sort of accommodate to the
kinds of rules and regulations we've come
to know on the institution has to do with
the problem of time. And that is we've got
a lot of people with a lot of good things
to say here. And I know if we were maybe
out at a community event or at an annual
pow hour festival of some type, maybe we
could put our watches away. way, but for
the purposes of getting everyone a chance
to speak, we are going to have to monitor
the time just a little bit. So I'm going
to, at least for the morning, I'll be
gone. In the afternoon, you can handle it
as you like, but for the morning, I think
I'll just sit up here, and I'll probably
prompt people when they get to about the
10-minute mark with a slip of paper, and
then give them about two more minutes just
to wrap it up, and then we'll go from
there into a time of question and answer,
and really be thinking about, you know,
engaging and listening listening actively,
not just listening passively, but what's
really being said and what's significant
about what's going on here, and what might
you be able to contribute. We'll also try
to keep the questions to a fairly short
format. If you want to make a speech, talk
to Rani and she'll put you on the program.
But if you just want to add another angle
of thinking about something or ask a
question, that would be the appropriate
way, and we'll try to get as many people
involved in that dialogue as possible. In
fact, I was also going to suggest, if
there's a couple people in the back tables
who want to move up to these two seats in
the front here, there's still a couple of
open if you want to be part of this closer
circle here. I just wanted to add that I
asked Robert Warrior if he could help
facilitate the question and answer. So if
you want to say something, just kind of
look at Robert and maybe just make a sign
or something, and then he can kind of help
with that. Do you want to move up here?
Yeah.
Anybody else that wants to just make a
comment before we get going here, or a
response of any type to the opening
comments? The other thing I wanted to do,
just before we began, is which I wanted to
go around the room and make sure everyone
just said their name, their tribe, and
their school. So... Can we start back
here? Clay, , , back to you. Jim still
from Stanford conventions. Lloyd Lee, from
Stanford. Kenny Woodward, from Stanford.
Gil from Stanford.
I'm Warrior Osage Stamper. I'm a box tree,
LX, Stanford. I'm Michael Selesky. I'm a
hunting animal, Bungie, UC Berkeley. I'm
Tony Schindler from Hainesville. Jake
DeManico, Bailey, Sackin' Fox, Oklahoma,
UC Santa Cruz. I'm Lawrence Tobar,
Comanche, Stanford. I'm Terry Greaves,
Kiowa, UCSC. And I'm James Treat, Creek, a
teacher at UC Santa Cruz. So. So, your
son, from Stanford.
Rainier Maris, went to big on Chippewa
from Stanford. Melinda Miko, from Chalk
Top and Mills College. Jessica A. Navajo,
Zamboy, Zamboy, Stanford. Allen Brown,
Chalk Top, Chippewa, Florida, Disney,
Virginia. Teresa LaFargo, . So, I'm going
to go with the same name. I'm going to go
with the same name. I'm going to go with
the same name.
I'm Larry Gross from Minnesota Chippewa.
Right now I'm at Smith College in
Northampton, Massachusetts. I've come a
long way for this symposium. That's good.
Pretty good.
. . I'm Chris . Yeah, if at the end of the
day you feel like it wasn't good, see Tina
about getting your money back. She'll be
glad to help you out. Not on the flight,
just the registration. .
Okay, well, let's begin then. Oh, I'm
sorry. Yes, Gil. I just wanted to say, for
those people that are not from here, kind
of some important things, the bathrooms
are downstairs. There's a men's bathroom
right below here. And the women's bathroom
is down the hall. Anyone else? Okay, we'll
go ahead and get started then. It's my
pleasure to introduce our first presenter
from UC Santa Cruz, Terry Greaves' Kiowa.
She's listed as history of consciousness,
which is sort of wishful thinking on
somebody's part, not mine. She's actually
in American studies. I wish I could
convince her to stick around and be a grad
student at ISKCON so I could continue to
work with her. But she's a graduating
senior. And she's teaching a student
-directed seminar this quarter, which is
her last quarter, titled Indians,
Redskins, Bucks, and Squaws, Images of
Indians in American Popular Culture, which
just started on Wednesday. She's only had
one meeting. She's going to talk to us
about her research, which she's been
working on for a year or so, that went
into the course, and then talk about her
course design and some of the things, the
kinds of methodological and theoretical
issues that that raises. And I think it's
a topic that we all can relate to at some
level and hopefully will provoke some good
discussion that may actually feed into her
course too. So, Terri? Well, like you
said, I'm teaching this class and, well, I
guess I'm going to be a little more
autobiographical than theoretical. But the
reason why I started this, this class was
going to be my thesis. And the reason why
I started looking into images of Indians
is because my mom owned an Indian arts and
crafts store on Wind River Reservation in
Wyoming. And my entire life, all the money
that we've survived off of has come from
selling Indian things and has come from
consumers want of those Indian things and
that identity. and I remember being a
little girl and my mother always used to
keep our hair in braids and we used to
play in front of the store and the white
tourists would ask us for photographs and
sometimes they'd give us money for it and
sometimes they wouldn't. But we thought it
was all fun and good and we'd get like
five bucks out of the deal. And basically
I guess they would come to the reservation
on their way to Yellowstone Park to see
Indians and they saw us, which is sort of
funny because we're Kiowa and Comanche.
We're not Shoshone or Arapaho from the
reservation, you know. And so part of what
my mother does is she sells herself along
with the arts and crafts. She dresses sort
of like the old ladies on the reservation
dress, and she's always dressed like that
from as long as I can remember, like
before I was born. and that is one of the
biggest selling points to the things that
she sells in her store. She's now in Santa
Fe. And last summer when I was in Santa Fe
visiting, I was hanging out in the store
with her and she was standing there and my
mother's like, you know, 60 now and she
was standing there and this white woman
came in and saw her and thought she was
just the cutest thing in the world and ran
right over to her and grabbed a hold of
her braids and sort of yanked on them and
said, oh, you're so cute, you're so cute.
And I remember looking at that and just
being obviously appalled and wanting to
hit this woman. But my mom, who deals with
this on a daily basis, was very composed
and said to her, please don't touch my
hair. And I saw over this woman's face a
sudden realization that she was dealing
with a human being and not a doll, not
this cute little Indian woman to be
fondled or touched or bought or whatever.
And I don't know, so that's what's led me
to look into these, to look into what
we're seen as and how we create ourselves
the way that my mother has created herself
because in a way she's brought this upon
herself. I mean she could dress like a
white person and blend in and she doesn't.
She sticks herself out and she does it for
survival. And it's more than just survival
of money. It's cultural survival also. And
so let's see. So I've been working on this
research for like almost two years now.
And I've come up with this really huge
bibliography. Part of it is annotated and
part of it is unannotated. The last six
pages are unannotated. And it's all
information, books, periodicals, articles,
films that I've come up with that all deal
with this issue in one way or another. And
I'd be happy to give this out. I'd really
like this information to get out there. I
hold no claim to it at all. The more
people who look at it and think about it,
the better. And the one thing that I found
and the way that I structured my course
was is there's two approaches to Indian
images and Indian identity from the
outside. And the first one comes from a
white perspective which looks at the
images as created by white people and
imposed. And then there's in the last, I'd
say maybe even ten years, not even that
long, there's a whole bunch of Indian
research and Indian writing and thinking
that sees Indian identity as that we have
agency in creating our Indian identity,
the way that my mother dresses up and
sells herself. yourself. And so, what was
I going to say?
Oh, one of the films that I'm looking at
is by a Hopi filmmaker. His name is Victor
Masayeswa. I'm probably totally
slaughtering that name. But he did this
film called Imagining Indians and it's an
excellent film. And it brings up issues
that for Native Americans, which is not a
lot, most of what I found doesn't bring up
those issues for Native Americans and what
he writes about or what he what he
visually shows is Indians dealing with
this this thing of having responsibility
for what we allow to be consumed what we
allow to be be commodified and one of the
things that he talks about is is sacred
items that are now for sale or sacred
items that have been turned into tourists
tourist items like pipe bags or something
like that and how we help that we help the
we help we help in losing the sacred of
our communities by by by doing that, by
allowing things to be commodified. And
it's something that I personally have a
lot of interest in because I'm a
beadworker. It's like I haven't had a real
job for the last, I don't know, five or
six years. And I've made most of my money
in the last few years on beadwork. And
what I create holds huge implications.
What I decide to allow to be sold, the
designs I decide to use, it can be
extremely appropriative and a really
sticky situation the more I think about
it. So he talks about, Victor Masayeswa
talks about this responsibility that we
have as Indian people to our own identity
and keeping the sacred sacred and using
our good judgment, using not letting money
talk all the time. And it's a really
difficult lesson for me to learn because
I'm poor and I really need the money. But
I don't know.
Let's see. I don't know like what else to
say about this. I'm teaching this class
and unfortunately most of the students in
my class are white and I don't think that
we're going to get into those issues that
I would like to get into and they're
really issues that maybe only Indians can
talk about because it's our identity
that's at stake. And we're the ones that
need to take control over the theorizing
and the writing that's done on who we are
and what our image is to the public. And I
don't know. I think I'm going to stop
there because I could go into, like,
greater detail about things, like
particulars that I found out about images,
but, you know, that might be boring.
Thanks, Sherry. Are there questions people
have right off the bat?
You used two terms in your presentation,
sacred and culture. How would you define
those terms? Oh, geez.
Well, I can only answer personally. I
don't know how else to answer, and I can
only answer from experience. And identity
is such a twisted thing in America, and it
has to do with race and for Indians it has
to do with blood quantum. And for me, my
understanding is I've seen Indians that
aren't really Indians, you know what I
mean? Blood quantum, they're not
recognized and it's the culture that ends
up ultimately defining how they're
received by their communities. And so in a
way I think that culture... Do I sound
like an anthropologist? I don't know,
maybe I do. But I think that culture
really defines a great deal of our
identity, obviously. And what was the
other term? Sacred.
Now that's really sticky. That's like
terribly sticky.
Well, Well, the way that Victor was using
it in this film was those things that are
central to our identity. And those things
that are central to our identity can be
seen as culture. They can also be seen as
a form of faith or religion. I don't like
the word religion. It seems too
institutional. I like the word faith
better, because it can come in any form.
And I think that they're sacred for all
people, not just Indians, obviously. And I
don't know, I guess that's how I define
it. I don't know if that answered your
question.
I have a question. When you're teaching in
this group, and you're the white students
there, are you getting the sense from them
that they're reinforcing those ideas is
about objectifying Indians as a commercial
commodity? Are you trying to undo it? Do
you see that coming from them? Are they
wanting to take that and again go out and
learn enough to again follow that path?
I've only had one class meeting, so I
can't tell you. I know it's kind of an
unfair question. But just even thinking
about it, because I always teach in
classes that I've heard and I would like
to use those two. Yeah. Yeah. Well, you
know, my hope is that I won't be
reinforcing the stereotypes. And I think
that the strategy that I'm going to use is
to constantly refer back to myself because
I'm a living model, right, standing in
front of them, breathing in front of them.
And I have these stories. Hopefully they
won't get bored by them. But I have all
these stories of what, how, I mean my
mom's in the art business and the art
business is all about identity. It's all
about image. I mean image is the first
thing that sells. The art comes later. And
if I can in some way use my life as an
example to show them maybe insights that
they're not going to get by reading, you
know, there's a really excellent book
called The White Man's Indian. I'm sure
you know it. at Burkhofer and you can't
get that from Burkhofer, you know what I
mean? It comes from a different
perspective. So I just hope by just
physically being there is going to push
it, push the issue past those stereotypes.
I don't know if it's going to work or not.
I've heard all kinds of horror stories
about how it doesn't work, so we'll see.
Do you want to talk about how your course
design addresses this issue as well in
terms of the first half and the second
half? the films you're using? Yeah, the
first half of the course is all work
written by non-Indians. And the film, I'm
only showing one film, is Thunderheart.
And they come from the white perspective.
And some of them, it's just some of it's
really excellent work. And I really
appreciate that. Some of it is very
controversial. controversial and I really
appreciate that too. And hopefully in the
class we can see how controversial and how
almost like polar opposite it is from the
Indian created writing and analysis, which
is the second half of the course. And I'm
using three films. They're all films by
Indian people. Navajo Talking Pictures,
Imagining Indians, and Herald of Orange.
And I think I mean, in particular,
Imagining Indians and Herald of Orange are
like two of, like they, when I watched
Imagining Indians for the first time, I
was like, yes, this is exactly what I want
to try to get across in my course, this
film. And if they can understand that film
by the end of the class, I'll be really
happy. I'll be really happy I'll have
succeeded.
I think you answered my question. In
helping to deal with issues of identity,
it seems like you have a couple audiences,
one non-Indians as well. And so I was
wondering in class how you can, part of
that would be the law of the team. I was
wondering how you can do that, make that
powerful. Right. I think you may have
already answered my question.
The class is a discussion class. It is not
a lecture class. class. I cannot imagine
myself lecturing. Like that just seems
really foreign to me. So, and the other
thing that I have going for me is I'm a
student. I'm totally equal level. I don't
have an office. I don't have, you know, a
super like professors box at the steno
pool or whatever. Well, actually that's
not true. I do. But anyway, it's like
almost a level playing field that I'm
coming from that that professors don't
have. And I hope that, I mean, when we're
out in the real world, isn't that when we
connect with another person, when we
really connect, it's when we feel like
we're on a level playing field, when we
can really hear what they're saying. So
I'm hoping that that's going to come
through. I don't know. We'll see. At the
end of the quarter, when I'm not
graduating, because my class is a total
failure, we'll see. When my students hate
my guts. I think I'm taking the hard line.
I just wanted to ask you if you have any
questions from your experience. If you
might want to ask, pose any questions here
since we have all kind of different people
here in the room with the wide points of
view.
Well, I don't know. I guess my question
would be, I
keep coming back to this film by Victor
Masayesva, which it just, it's an
incredible film and I recommend it to
anyone, everyone. everyone. And he shows
the scene of these paintings on a rock
wall and he's talking about like looking
back through time how once we used to make
these things for survival, for life, and
then somewhere along the line money
started to be exchanged for these items.
And then somewhere along the line after
that we stopped claiming responsibility
for that whole process of exchange for
survival. Maybe not seeing it or seeing it
in the same light or not seeing it in the
same light. And I just wonder, like I
said, it's a really difficult question for
me to deal with. Like my own
responsibility to what I do, to the art
that I do. And, but
at the same instance, I do feel this
responsibility to the sacred, whatever the
heck that is, I don't know. And I don't
know, I guess my question is, what do
people think about that? I mean, it's, of
course, I think, like, people have always,
Indian people have always done that. But
to a certain extent, like with the, I can
see it in the movie industry better than
any other industry, is Indian film stars
walking into roles that maybe are not the
best roles to be walking into. And doing
it for money. And then not liking to hear
any criticism of them coming from the
Indian community for doing that. And
saying, oh well, the Indian community is
poor and this is a way that I'm getting
out of it. but in a way it compromises our
identity. Can I just add something to that
based on some conversations that we've had
in my office that she hasn't quite said it
this way, but I think some of the things
that I've learned from Terry in terms of
the questions that she's asking that she's
posing to the people in this room is that
it's one thing for us to stand up and
lament the commodification of Indian
culture or the inappropriate
appropriations
committed in the name of New Age
spirituality and on down the list. But
what happens when we acknowledge that
Indian people, both today and in the past,
have been active participants? Not all
Indian people, but there have been some.
What do we do when we acknowledge that
Indian people have been participating in
that? And the question is not a question
of politics. It's not a question of laying
blame, so much as it's an intellectual
question, which is to ask, what's going on
culturally? What's the significance of
that? It's not that by acknowledging that
Indian people have been participating in
it that thereby we can't blame non-Indians
for what they're doing. It's an
intellectual question, as I understand the
way you're approaching it. She's really
asking the question, what does this mean
for us? What does this mean about Indian
culture? What does it tell us? What kinds
of questions does it ask? I haven't heard
you say it quite that way today, but
that's what I've picked up in our
conversations as you worked on this
research. I'll make a quick comment and
then give them to other questions. I think
it illustrates to Terry and James that it
represents a crisis intellectually, but
also at the level of responsibility.
There's a moment, I think we've been
talking about the same film, of Rodney
Grant from Dance with Wolves, making a
comment in that film, it's the same one,
right? and where Victor poses to him the
question about commodifying himself,
basically. What roles do you take? Which
ones do you not take? And one of the
questions is, well, are you going to take
responsibility for creating Native
American film industry, for films by
Native American directors like Victor?
Would you take $5,000 to do a film with me
instead of $1,000,000 to do a film over
here? And Rodney Grant ends up sort of
avoiding the question. He doesn't want to
talk about it. And there's a way in which
that film problematizes for me an
avoidance of a real crisis. And why I
think it's a really interesting topic to
bring up is there's also not among Indian
writers enough theorizing about this
question of responsibility. because it's a
really difficult issue. And teaching is
actually one of those places where you
have to confront it. And you'll find that
out, and everyone here who has taught
finds that out as well, where generally
you are in situations where you are
somehow standing in as a representative of
lots and lots of people and lots of points
of view. No matter how much you don't want
to be, that's the situation you're faced
with as a teacher. And so you'll have to
confront it at that point. There's a
wonderful side of that. There's also a
really sticky part of it, too. And I find
that those people who really want to
embrace that and say, yeah, I want to be
that person, that's when you run into
problems. If you're too eager to go into
that situation and say, yeah, I'll
represent the Indian voice to all of these
people. So it's a huge issue that will
probably come up all day. We'll move on to
some other questions.
You bring out many deep questions, many
deep issues. I'm not sure that I
understand everything, but there is one
issue that you bring out and really
touched me. It's the question of art and
money. Because I'm a person who paints,
and I use painting to know it more myself,
and also to try to come in with other
person to share what I know or what I
don't know with my art. And you just
involve the question of sending because we
have to survive. I need to leave the art
that I'm doing. And presently, I'm not
ready to send my art because I don't know
exactly why. And I'm not ready to paint to
please the public when they watch because
the art for me is something more deep. And
I understand a little bit you when you
involve this question, but I don't have
all the answers. But I just share your
fear with this, because in art I think
there is something very deep, and it's
really personal, but at the same time, I
think that there is something universal in
art. There is a kind of spirit inside art,
art, then with
money there is something that I don't
understand. That's what I wanted to say.
Yeah, my presentation last time, which I
will try not to get into, basically dealt
with this about Indian art. Because Indian
art is really defined in many different
ways, and it's defined by time. And
antique Indian art is worth way more than
Indian art presently made. But then within
the presently made Indian art, certain
types of art are considered crafts that
anybody can do. Bead work, feather work,
wood work, anything like that. And then
there's another type of art that is
considered fine art or high art. Pottery,
modern paintings, baskets, like that. and
there will be, like if you go into Santa
Fe, there's like one whole gallery
dedicated just to pots, and they're not
old pots. They're pots that are currently
made. And my question is, why isn't there
a store dedicated also to beadwork? There
is, but it's mass-produced beadwork. And I
just, I question, like, what's going on
there just within the market itself that
defines what art is. And there's something
coming up on the thing about looking at
Indian history and something about terms
in Indian history. And I think that part
of that, yeah, problematizing the term of
traditional culture, because a lot of the
modern artwork that's being made by
Indians is traditionally based, but maybe
not like, you know, beaded tennis shoes or
something like that with traditional
designs on it. It's like how do you define
that and how does the market define that?
So we live in, you know, a market-driven
economy and in an art is just like any
other commodity, so we have to deal with
that. Maybe with that we'll let people
comment during lunch and during the breaks
and things to Terry. I thought that was
great, so thank you. Thank you.
For those of you who are following along
the schedule and correlating it with the
watch on the end of your arm, the way
we're going to deal with the time, we
start at about 15 minutes late, and we're
just going to be about 15 minutes behind,
and we'll have lunch at about 12.15. So
you don't have to get nervous or antsy if
we're running still about 10 minutes
behind. That's our plan for right now. Our
next speaker is Jacob Manitoul Bailey, Sac
and Fox. And I wish Jacob were an American
Studies major. He's taken a lot of courses
in American Studies, but unfortunately he
was seduced by the Community Studies Board
because they would allow him to do a six
-month field internship, and he's going to
be going to Oklahoma to work with the Sac
and Fox at the end of the spring quarter.
Is that right? He won't be back until the
first of the year. And he's been involved
in a number of projects on campus and one
of the most important has to do with the
repatriation process at UC Santa Cruz. He
has been doing an internship and has
learned a great deal about art
collections. Probably the second most
knowledgeable person on the campus right
now about the small collection that we
have of Indian remains at UC Santa Cruz,
and has also taken it in his own
characteristically intellectual way,
raising some very broad questions about
the relationship, both institutional and
intellectual, between the discipline of
anthropology and the American Indian
community, and so has a number of
interesting points to raise. and he's
going to talk about the whole repatriation
situation at UCSC. Jacob? Well, I might
get that far. I'm not sure yet.
One of my nicknames for Terry is Boss, and
I tell you that because I'm going to be
following a lot of what she said and what
I want to discuss today. day. And
repatriation
as it has been defined stands for, and
this is a legal definition, the return of
sacred objects, human remains,
unassociated funerary goods, and items of
of cultural patrimony to American Indian
nations.
And repatriation currently is largely
discussed within the terms and defined
within the terms of NAGPRA, which is the
Native American Graves Repatriation and
Protection Act, which was passed in 1990.
And I say I want to follow Terry because I
I want to talk about images, stereotypes,
assumptions, responsibility, a lot of the
same issues.
And I also want to follow her by starting
with a story about my mother. Because when
my mother was going to school, there was
no such thing as Native American studies.
There was no such thing as Indian
education. If you wanted to have anything
to do with Indians in the college setting,
he went into anthropology. And a lot of
Indians went into anthropology and some of
them made it and a lot more didn't make
it. And my mom was one of those. She
dropped out of college and I grew up with
stories about the crazy things that
anthropologists thought about Indians and
the even sicker things that they they did
to our dead. And when I first started, and
I'm really glad that there's a lot of
anthropology students on this sheet. Maybe
we can get a little dialogue going here,
because I have a lot of problems.
I've always grown up with a lot of
assumptions and a lot of stereotypes about
anthropologists. and when I first started
researching repatriation, I uncovered
horror story after horror story about past
and current anthropological practice. And
it reinforced a lot of the ideas I had
about anthropology and what it does and
what it has done to Indian people. And at
the same time I've had sort of a morbid
fascination with the strange creatures and
sort of the rituals that they seem to love
to carry out. And those were the terms
that I thought about anthropology and
anthropologists when I started interning
at the University of California Santa Cruz
Archaeological Collection.
The repatriation debate, and I shouldn't
use the word debate, I shouldn't even use
the word movement, I should use the word
war, because that's the way that both a
lot of Natives and a lot of non-Natives
writing about repatriation have defined
it. They've defined it as a war, as a war
of science versus religion, a war of
objective, cold, analytical
anthropologists versus warm, spiritual
Indians. Indians. And a lot of the titles
of articles written by both Natives and
non-Natives, a lot of prominent people are
things like science or sacrilege,
disputing the dead, preservation or
reburial, Native Americans versus American
museums, a battle for artifacts. And so
this This is the mindset that prevails in
a lot of places, and it was the mindset
that I had when I started interning at the
anthropology department. That was an
extremely difficult process for me. You
walk into this building. It's called
Social Sciences I. I normally refer to it
as the evil building. And it's this big
concrete monolith. You know, you walk up
two stairs of floor, the air starts to get
stale. The posters start to appear on the
wall. Paleolithic culture and plains
material items in the faunal area. You
know, people are talking in languages that
I can't understand. And I get to the
fourth floor where they keep the bodies,
and I start getting pretty whacked out.
When I first started my internship, I
could only think of things in either-or
situations. It was either I go in there
and I lay my agenda out on the table, or I
hide it and I compromise my sense of
integrity. And every situation that I
found myself in was a set of either-or
statements, neither of which I was happy
with. And eventually what I was forced to
do for my own sanity and to get anywhere
in working to help the repatriation
process was that I had to go out on a
limb. I had to put myself out there and I
had to explain to my supervisor, who's an
archaeologist, and my my coworker who is
an archaeology student that I had a lot of
fear and a lot of anger about what was
going on. And I was amazed, I was
absolutely amazed at the emotional
responses that I got from those people.
and what they told me about how they felt
and how they had become sick, how they
felt forces, and how hard it was for them
to be involved in such a thing. And we
really begin to build bridges to
facilitate a way of thinking about
repatriation that wasn't us versus them.
It wasn't me carrying a banner going in
there to get rid of anthropology. And I
think that Indians have a lot of
stereotypes about anthropologists.
Anthropologists have a lot of stereotypes
about Indians. And the dominant society
has stereotypes about both of them, which
feed into a rhetoric which divides us. And
this is when it comes to survival and when
it comes to responsibility, like Terry was
talking about, is that anthropologists,
the most of them, When I really sat down
and talked with them, the basic thing that
comes out is that they love Indians. That
they love Indians, that they feel a
responsibility towards Indians, that the
whole reason they went into their field is
because they wanted to help Indians. And
they got into the field and then they
found out that they had to do these
certain things. which wasn't what they
thought and they ended up interacting with
objects and with remains and not with live
human beings and repatriation has forced a
lot of anthropologists to and a lot of
Indians to get over their fear about each
other and to come together to work on
projects to to try to to resolve this
crisis.
And anthropologists, and I use the term so
generally and so broadly, and I refer to
such a huge group of people, but there's a
narrative that's emerging which is trying
to succeed the one that's of us us versus
them, which says we can work together. And
we can work together to do some important
things. So that's the first sort of issue
I want to pose. The second issue I want to
pose is...
is about how the rhetoric around
repatriation
talks about Indians and about how they
feel about spirits and their ancestors and
desecration and things like this in a way
that really disturbs me and it disturbs me
because it's not tribally specific and
it's not guided by that For instance,
there's a national NAGPRA committee and
they have field meetings which are helped
to formulate policy. And at one of these
field meetings there was a presentation
which represented the Indian viewpoint for
that segment. segment and the people who
got up there were political activists and
they basically said that all these bones
need to go back in the ground and we don't
care what they are. We don't care if
they're Chinese, we don't care if they're
Jewish, we don't care what what tribe they
are. The spirits have been disturbed. The
spirits have been disturbed. And we need
to put them at peace.
And repatriation was an intertribal
movement to deal with some very serious
issues, dangerous
issues, powerful issues, things that I
cannot possibly understand and my solution
is to look to the people in my community
like I'm going for six months to intern
with the second Fox repatriation committee
which is made up of elders and their
response is that they need to move
extremely slow they need to be extremely
careful because they're dealing with very
very powerful and dangerous issues, and
that they need to be guided by the
traditional beliefs and the traditional
ways that have guided them in everything
else they do. And what I see going on a
lot of other places is these remains,
these ancestors, become a war trophy, we
will get these